Graph slam has a graph within it's name because it uses
graphs to represent the robot's poses and the environment.
Let's build a very simple graph to better understand how they work.
A robot suppose, it's position and orientation can be represented by a node like so.
This is let's suppose a timestep zero.
Usually, the first node is arbitrarily constrained to zero,
zero or it's equivalent in greater dimensions.
The robots pose a timestep one,
can be represented by another node.
And the two would be connected by an edge,
sometimes called an arc.
This edge is a soft spatial constraint between the two robot poses.
These constraints are called soft because,
as we have seen before,
motion and measurement data is uncertain.
The constraints will have some amount of error present.
Soft constraints come in two forms.
Motion constraints between two successive robot poses and
measurement constraints between a robot pose and a feature in the environment.
The constraint seen between x0 and x1 is a motion constraint.
If the robot were to sense it's environments and encounter a feature m1,
a soft measurement constraint would be added.
Here, the star represents a feature in the environment.
This could be a landmark specifically placed for the purpose of localization and mapping,
or an identifiable element of the environment such as a corner or an edge.
Note that the notation that I have chosen to use has solid edges
representing motion constraints and dashed edges representing measurement constraints.
I find that this notation makes the graph easier to comprehend.
As before, the robot poses are labeled x1 and x2,
while the features will be labeled m1 and m2.
As the robot moves around,
more and more nodes are added to the graph.
And over time, the graph constructed by the mobile robot becomes very large in size.
Luckily, graph slam is able to handle large numbers of features.